---
title: "Final"
---
#### Making Music with Tinkamo

Synthesizer controlled by Swappable Bluetooth Sensor Blocks.

***Include a link to the performance here.***

### Project Overview
I built a framework for interfacing . Eventually, after early versions of the work, Jam, the founder of Tinkamo, gave me a couple keys for understanding what the messages mean.

***Include a picture of the patch here.***

### Ideas Driving the Piece
The piece primarily revolves around the distance sensor. I wanted to come up with an instrument that is controlled essentially as a simple theremin but utilizes a more interesting mapping than height -> pitch, I came up with the idea of controlling the number of chord tones with height. As the performer raises his/her hand up in the air up to six notes in the chord fade in. This idea of chord tones opened up the challenge of how to change chords with only one sensor input. From there, I came up with the idea of using the sensor as a switch - once the distance sensor

Some of the feedback I got from the class during the User Testing Session was that the drum patch felt like a completely separate music composition. So, I took some of the control and rhythmic components from that patch and applied them to my "chord theremin." The color sensor controls distortion level via a simple bit crusher. (Certain distortion resonate especially well.) The button toggles a series of pulses to play. There are two sets of rhythmic pulses, one panned to each side that interlock. Finally, the knob controls the tempo of the pulses. Each of these components make for an intstrument that is pretty fun to improvise and interact with.
